******************************************************************

Reviewer 1:
        Originality:  Accept
        Quality:  Strong Accept
        Relevance:  Accept
        Presentation:  Strong Accept
        Recommendation:  Strong Accept
Summary:  The paper describes the implementation of an open access
programming environment for novice learners in data science or
computational thinking.

Detailed comments:  The paper describes a practical implementation of a
programming environment that suits students of both CS and non-CS
majors. The entire paper is excellently organized, presented and argued.
The work is educationally sound and useful. The implementation issues
and decisions are described and convincingly justified in detail. The
implementation takes advantage of and well integrates the
state-of-the-art techniques in visual programming, program-to-text
translation, Python language core technologies, program visualisation
tools, as well as static program analysis tools. Although none of these
are novel in this paper (all being existing work from others), the paper
convincingly integrates all these seamlessly into a practical
programming environment that supports teaching in a variety of contexts:
introductory programming, big data analysis, computational literacy, and
more importantly, grounded on real-life problems that students probably
show interests.  The paper also includes a pilot evaluation that shows
the system's potentials while admitting its current limitations with
clear future directions for improvement. The open-access nature of the
programming environment is an added contribution to the CS and
educational community as it promises much broader impact as well as
opening the path for collaborative improvement.  In short, the paper
describes an excellent, promising and extensible programming environment
for computing education in well-situated contexts that benefits students
of both CS and non-CS majors.

******************************************************************

Reviewer 2:
        Originality:  Neutral
        Quality:  Weak Accept
        Relevance:  Accept
        Presentation:  Accept
        Recommendation:  Weak Accept
Summary:  the paper presents a new framework which can be used by
students willing to learn programming, as well as instructors for such
classes. Contrary to current trend of programming tutorial involving
creation of games, this framework takes a more practical approach of
choosing data science as sample use cases, which is likely to make
students more interested about programming as it is directly linked with
their career.

Detailed comments:  Presentation - well articulated with example cases
and easy to read.  Content - The paper talks in depth about the BlockPy
framework which allows students to learn python programming using blocks
to create the code in a visual manner. The authors present valid
arguments for choosing python as the language, data science as use cases
and the block method for visual programming. However, BlockPy borrows a
lot of things from existing frameworks (which is acknowledged by the
authors) and provides subtle novelties compared to the rest. It records
keystrokes and analyses the logs to detect programming patterns to learn
about student behaviour which may provide insights into the cognitive
capability of students. This is an interesting approach, however, not
much details have been provided, and I would recommend the authors to
stress on this particular aspect as this can be important in the
educational sector. The authors have also performed a survey on real
students regarding the usability and effectiveness of BlockPy and have
presented the results in an informative manner - though the survey
population is rather small.

******************************************************************

Reviewer 3:
        Originality:  Weak Accept
        Quality:  Strong Accept
        Relevance:  Strong Accept
        Presentation:  Strong Accept
        Recommendation:  Accept
Summary:  presents BlockPy and also a pilot study based on this.

Detailed comments:  1. Liked the thorough and lucid presentation.  2.
Now, there are plenty of block languages for beginning learners
(scratch, appinventor etc etc). So not such a novel concept?  3.
However, liked the methodology of the pilot study and would like to
learn more about it. Interesting that there were more females than male!
4. Although the title states data science, the  paper has not much to do
with that aspect of the work. Not clear about its relevance (for example
in the pilot study).  5. Would have liked elaboration on the adaptive
guided practice (i.e. beyond what was given).

******************************************************************